---
title: "Crowdsourcing Rural Network Maintenance and Repair via Network Messaging"
date: 2018-04-21
draft: false
type: "publication"
description: "Published at CHI 2018"
tags: [
    "Rural Development",
    "Internet Access",
    "Technology for Development",
    "ICTD",
    "Crowdsourcing",
    ]
categories: [
    "publications",
    "cellular",
    ]
---

#### abstract:

Repair and maintenance requirements limit the successful operation of
rural infrastructure. Current best practices are centralized
management, which requires travel from urban areas and is
prohibitively expensive, or intensively training community members,
which limits scaling. We explore an alternative model: crowdsourcing
repair from the community. Leveraging a Community Cellular Network in
the remote Philippines, we sent SMS to all active network subscribers
(n = 63) requesting technical support. From the pool of physical
respondents, we explored their ability to repair through mock failures
and conducted semi-structured interviews about their experiences with
repair. We learned that community members would be eager to practice
repair if allowed, would network to recruit more expertise, and
seemingly have the collective capacity to resolve some common
failures. They are most successful when repairs map directly to their
lived experiences. We suggest infrastructure design considerations
that could make repairs more tractable and argue for an inclusive
approach.

#### cite:

Esther Jang, Mary Claire Barela, Matt Johnson, Philip Martinez, Cedric Festin, Margaret Lynn, Josephine Dionisio, and Kurtis Heimerl. 2018. Crowdsourcing Rural Network Maintenance and Repair via Network Messaging. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Paper 67, 1–12. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173641


#### Official ACM Download:

(Use this one)
[https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3173574.3173641?cid=99659180407](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3173574.3173641?cid=99659180407)

#### Unofficial pre-print download:

(Just in case)


