---
title: "Trust and Technology Repair Infrastructures in the Remote Rural Philippines: Navigating Urban-Rural Seams"
date: 2019-11-01
draft: false
type: "publication"
description: "Published at CSCW 2019"
summary: "Published at CSCW 2019"
tags: [
    "repair",
    "rural-development",
    "technology-for-development",
    "ICTD"
    ]
categories: [
    "publications",
    ]
---

#### abstract:

This paper analyzes the processes and challenges of technology repair
in remote, low-income areas far from standard ICT repair
infrastructure. Our sites of study are the fishing and farming
villages of Dibut, Diotorin, and Dikapinisan in Aurora Province,
Philippines, located in coastal coves against a mountain
range. Residents are geographically isolated from urban areas, with
the nearest peri-urban center of Baler a boat trip of several hours
away, infeasible in some sea conditions. Unlike prior work in more
connected rural areas, there are no local repair shops and device
repair is uncommon, despite frequent breakage due to harsh conditions
for electronics. The scarcity of local electronics repair limits
technology access and leads to accumulation of e-waste. While prior
work demonstrates that local electronics repair capability does arise
in many rural areas around the world, we must also acknowledge that
the successful emergence of this infrastructure depends on the
intersection of many structural conditions and cannot be taken for
granted. We present the material hardships of achieving local repair
in terms of seams between heterogeneous urban and rural
infrastructures, which illustrate the cove communities' marginality
with respect to many forms of public infrastructure. However,
intermittent and informal repair infrastructures based on trust
relationships emerge to patch these seams in remote settings. We show
how trust affects the way people dynamically construct repair
infrastructure and why, based on their remoteness and the resulting
value propositions of repair. Networks of trust between repairers,
their clients, suppliers, fellow repairers, and certifying or training
institutions crucially facilitate the movement of resources and
expertise across the Philippines, but also reinforce the marginality
of residents and repairers in the coves. Despite these structural
challenges, local people are able to maintain a robust ecosystem for
rural electrical line repair, from which we generalize the model of
training grounds as a strategy for sustaining local communities of
repair experts.

#### cite:

Esther Han Beol Jang, Philip Garrison, Ronel Vincent Vistal, Maria Theresa D. Cunanan, Maria Theresa Perez, Philip Martinez, **Matthew William Johnson**, John Andrew Evangelista, Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed, Josephine Dionisio, Mary Claire Aguilar Barela, and Kurtis Heimerl. 2019. Trust and Technology Repair Infrastructures in the Remote Rural Philippines: Navigating Urban-Rural Seams. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 3, CSCW, Article 99 (November 2019), 25 pages. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3359201

#### Official ACM Download:

(Use this one)

[https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3359201?cid=99659180407](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3359201?cid=99659180407)

#### Unofficial pre-print download:

(Just in case)


