---
title: "Scaling community cellular networks with community cellular manager"
date: 2019-02-26
draft: false
type: "publication"
description: "Published at NSDI 2019"
tags: [
    "community-cellular",
    "philippines",
    "ccm",
    "management",
    "operator-integration",
    "community-network",
    ]
categories: [
    "publications",
    "cellular",
    ]
---

#### abstract:

Hundreds of millions of people still live beyond the coverage of basic
mobile connectivity, primarily in rural areas with low population
density. Mobile-network operators (MNOs) traditionally struggle to
justify expansion into these rural areas due to the high
infrastructure costs necessary to provide service. Community cellular
networks, networks built "by and for" the people they serve, represent
an alternative model that, to an extent, bypasses these business case
limitations and enables sustainable rural coverage. Yet despite
aligned economic incentives, real deployments of community cellular
networks still face significant regulatory, commercial and technical
challenges.

In this paper, we present CommunityCellularManager (CCM), a system for
operating community cellular networks at scale. CCM enables multiple
community networks to operate under the control of a single,
multi-tenant controller and in partnership with a traditional MNO. CCM
preserves flexibility for each community network to operate
independently, while allowing the mobile network operator to safely
make critical resources such as spectrum and phone numbers available
to these networks. We evaluate CCM through a multi-year, large-scale
community cellular network deployment in the Philippines in
partnership with a traditional MNO, providing basic communication
services to over 2,000 people in 15 communities without requiring
changes to the existing regulatory framework, and using existing
handsets. We demonstrate that CCM can support independent community
networks with unique service offerings and operating models while
providing a basic level of MNO-defined service. To our knowledge, this
represents the largest deployment of community cellular networks to
date.

#### cite:

Shaddi Hasan, Mary Claire Barela, Matthew Johnson, Eric Brewer, and Kurtis Heimerl. 2019. Scaling community cellular networks with community cellular manager. In Proceedings of the 16th USENIX Conference on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI’19). USENIX Association, USA, 735–750.

#### Official USENIX Download:

(Use this one)
[https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi19/presentation/hasan](https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi19/presentation/hasan)

#### Unofficial pre-print download:

(Just in case)


