---
title: "About Me"
showDate: false
showReadingTime: false
showAuthor: false
sharingLinks: false
---

## Work
I am currently a software engineer at SpaceX in Redmond, WA working on
[Starlink](https://www.starlink.com/technology), a global low-earth-orbit
satellite Internet service. I'm passionate about ubiquitous global
connectivity, and am excited to work towards a world where everyone can get a
performant, reliable, and affordable Internet connection should they desire it.

Previously I was a graduate student at the University of Washington ("U-dub")
affiliated with the [ICTD Lab](https://ictd.cs.washington.edu) and [Prof. Kurtis
Heimerl](https://kurti.sh). My PhD research focused on Community Cellular
Networking with an emphasis on the challenges of implementing and sustaining
Community Cellular networks in the 4G and 5G era. I received the [Borriello
Fellowship](https://www.cs.washington.edu/students/grad/awardrecipients/borriello)
in 2016, and a 5-year [National Science Foundation Graduate Research
Fellowship](https://www.nsfgrfp.org/) in 2018. Through my work at UW I got the
opportunity to travel significantly and deploy community cellular networks both
within the US and abroad. I was one of the developers on, and now the current
maintainer of, our lab's suite of tools for deploying and operating community
cellular networks (the **Co**mmunity**LTE** project,
[CoLTE](https://github.com/uw-ictd/colte)).

Before UW, I was a member on the embedded dsp/mac team at [TrellisWare
Technologies](https://www.trellisware.com/). There I helped design and implement
the TSM-X waveform's medium access control protocol, optimized the power
utilization of the legacy TSM waveform, and developed a new "Position and
Location Information" (PLI) subsystem (among other projects). I have also had
the opportunity to intern with the [Project
Loon](https://x.company/projects/loon/) backhaul software team and the [National
Instruments](https://www.ni.com/en-us.html) Rio hardware team.

## Me Personally
I am a human being. I enjoy learning about the world, meeting people from
different cultures, building tools, taking photographs, hiking, bike riding,
reading, trying new food, and traveling. My primary language is English and I
speak some Spanish. I tend to use emacs, but know how to get around vim. I went
to undergrad at [Rice University](https://rice.edu) in Houston, Texas, USA and
currently reside in Seattle, Washington, USA.

## Other Stuff
You can find a [PDF version of my resume here](/matt9j-resume.pdf).
